So
this is clearly a case where international
cooperation is highly desirable in a funny sort of
way. That is, it's one facility, the Glomar
Challenger, the only ship of its kind in the world.
And it's very expensive to operate. And yet it can
serve the interests of scientists from many
different countries. Just exactly the opposite
of the other justification I gave a few minutes
ago, where you need facilities from many
different countries to study one phenomenon.
Here you have the possibility of studying many
phenomena, which scientists from many different
countries are interested in. But no one country,
except the United States, feels that it can afford
it. operate the equipment single-handed. And we
welcome very much the financial participation
and the scientific participation of people from
other countries. So in both the justifications
I've given, the cooperation is basically in terms
of facilities, facilities belonging to
different countries or facilities belonging to
one country but used by many different countries.
A third reason for international cooperation is
to share results and ideas. And this is
accomplished by various kinds of scientific
unions or other organizations for that purpose.
In the case of oceanography, as we said yesterday,
oceanography is not really a science. a lot of
different sciences doing research on an object of
study, namely the ocean, namely that part of the
earth which is covered in seawater.
That is the air and the solid earth and the water
itself and the critters that live in the water. And
so there's no international union a disciplinary
union that deals specifically with the ocean.
There are lots of them, the physicists, the
chemists, the biologists, the geologists, the
geologists, and geophysicists. They're all
interested in ocean science. So you need an
organization which is orthogonal to the
disciplinary unions, an object of study union.
And that's furnished by the Scientific Committee
on Oceanic Research, SCORE, which consists of
representatives of the different unions. And in
each union, there is one or more associations
particularly concerned with the ocean, not in
every union, but in three or four of them. For
example, in the International Union of Geology
and Geophysics, there's the Association of
Physical Sciences of the Ocean. In the Union of
Biological Sciences, there's the Association
for Marine Biology. In the Union of Geological
Sciences, a section or commission on marine
geology, submarine geology, and so forth. And
all these associations come together under the
leadership of SCORE to have a joint oceanographic
congress, an international oceanographic
congress, every three or four years. The next one
will be in Edinburgh this fall.
There was one in Tokyo. two or three years ago, and
before that one in Moscow. The first one was the one
that you referred to, which was held at the United
Nations headquarters in New York, called the
First International Oceanographic Congress.
And that was the one that was masterminded by Mary
Sears, which I was the president of.
I thought it was a tremendous occasion, and
they're all very good occasions, these
oceanographic congresses. They're the only way
in which you can bring together people from all the
various sciences that are connected with the
ocean, that are interested in the ocean, to talk to
each other about the ocean and not about their
science, not about their particular discipline
of science.
And this also leads to another kind of
cooperation, which is
scientists working in each other's laboratories
or on each other's ships.
For example, on our mid-Pacific expedition, Anri
Roche, my friend, who's now in New Caledonia, took
part in that.
You did set up this Soviet geophysicist I've been
telling you about, and several of his associates
have been out on our ships. We've been out on the
Russian ships.
And there's often exchange in the laboratory,
too, when working out the results. These are very
valuable learning experiences on both sides.
They're mutually beneficial. I think that I would
say several things about international
cooperation. One is that it's darn difficult.
Therefore, you don't want to do it unless you have
to. It's more difficult on a worldwide basis than
it is on a regional basis. Much easier cooperation
between two countries is much easier than
cooperation between three, and the difficulties
go up exponentially as the number of countries
increases.
And the effectiveness goes down.
In some cases, you have to have many countries.
In my experience in oceanography,
international cooperation never works unless
the Americans take the lead.
And there's several reasons for this. One reason
is we've got so many scientists. one third of all
the science in the world.
The more important reason is that we're used to
cooperation.
We're kind of a league of nations. The United
States all by itself is kind of a league of nations
in the sense that it's so big and has so many
institutions that have to learn how to cooperate
with each other.
And we have a tradition of what de Tocqueville
called voluntary associations. Remember, de
Tocqueville said that whenever two
or more Americans have an objective, something
that they want to accomplish, they form a
voluntary association for every conceivable
purpose. And we're in France to find the
government taking the lead push different
interests or different objectives. And in
England, you'd find some aristocratic leader
pushing an objective. In the United States, you
have a voluntary association. These voluntary
associations are
ways in which we Americans learn how to get things
done together. So we have a great advantage. in
international scientific cooperation, simply
because we've had a lot of experience thinking of
ways to cooperate.
In any case, I think the record would show that it
works best when the Americans are very much
involved. Now,
one of the aspects of being very much involved is
that we don't ever get out in front. I almost never
find an American as a president of an association,
an international cooperative enterprise. But
you're very often finding a secretary.
And this is part of the technique of doing the job.
For example, the first secretary of the UNESCO
Office of Oceanography was an American named
Warren Wooster,
who at that time was with Scripps,
and later became director of the Rosenstiel
Marine Laboratories at the University of Miami,
and has now just gone to the University of
Washington. He's probably the most talented
scientific bureaucrat I've ever seen in my life.
Remember I told him, I mentioned him yesterday, he
had a great expedition. Just very good at getting,
at administering big, big scientific
enterprise.
Then later he was the secretary and president of
SCORE.
And that's what really made SCORE work. His very
great effectiveness is running it.
But another aspect of scientific cooperation is
that it just doesn't work if you let politics get
involved in it. And this is what's unfortunately
happened to the IOC, the Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission. It's really been
taken over by the diplomats.
But its effectiveness is very, very low now. For
the first 10 years, the delegates were
scientists.
The scientists had no trouble agreeing, but once
you get the politicians into the act,
everything slows down to a grinding halt.
I wrote a paper, or I gave a paper about a year ago,
which I called Ten Commandments for
International Cooperation.
I mean, and I thought I would tell you now some of
these commandments.
One other, there are several others, but they're
all sort of second to the ones I've just stated.
Like, for example, you really want to do a, you want
to prepare for it. And no meeting really works
unless you have a, have it in the right place, with
the right people, carefully prepared agenda
and careful attention to everything from housing
to food to entertainment to the lack of
distraction.
For example, we had a very successful meeting
organized by Warren Wooster on the island of Ponza
off the Italian coast.
And the reason it was successful was, A, it was a
beautiful place, and, B, you couldn't do anything
else but talk to the demography for four days, for a
week, because there was nothing else there. Well,
those are all sort of experience, details.
Details learned by experience.
So I'm proud of several things here, but basically
I'm proud of the fact
that many Americans, many American
oceanographers
now are enthusiastic about international
society cooperation. Whereas to begin with, that
was not the case.
Now, what issues did you advise the Secretary of
Interior on from 61 to 63? What issues? Why would
you be attached to the Secretary of Interior's
office in the sense of a special advisor? Well,
that's a good question. The answer is not very
simple.
I was a good friend of Jerry Weasley. who was
President Kennedy's science advisor. We've
gotten to know each other through the Pugwash
movement, and also in various other scientific
.
So when Kennedy came into office, Jerry became his
special assistant for science and technology.
He felt that every department should have what
amounted to an assistant secretary for science
and technology. And there was one already in the
Navy, Jim Wakelin, one of these guys. By the way,
the name of that coordinator for research and
development was Fuhrer, F-U-H-R-E-R.
He'd been an admiral through his staff and later
became assistant secretary of the Navy for
science and technology. And Jerry was able to get
an assistant secretaryship established in the
Department of Commerce for Holloman. He took that
job.
And in the Army and in the Air Force. And
in the Some other departments, it was impossible
to establish another assistant secretary, but
they instead put in this Office of Science
Advisory, which was true of HEW, and true of
Interior, and true of State, the State
Department.
And I guess it was also more or less true
Science advisor, it was a political appointment,
but it didn't have to be confirmed by the Senate.
The secretary himself could make it.
Your title was special assistant to the
secretary. Well, Stuart Udall didn't really want
a science advisor. He didn't quite know what to do
with one. But he didn't object. He thought it might
be a good idea.
Well,
the Department of the Interior is a collection of
baronets or dukedoms, the heads of which are each
more powerful than the secretary, including the
Geological Survey, the Bureau of Reclamation,
the Bureau of Land Management, at that time Bureau
of Commercial Fisheries and Sports Fisheries and
Wildlife,
the National Park Service,
Bureau of Mines,
and
the various offices. And particularly the old
line agencies like the Geological Survey and the
Bureau of Reclamation had developed
constituencies in Congress and in the states. So
they had an enormous continuing strength. I
remember very well Floyd Dominey, the
Commissioner of Reclamation, the slippery
character.
very, really, you know, quite arrogantly
powerful for a very good reason. You have the
Congressman eating out of his hand. It's the
undersecretary of a man named,
when I was arrogant, it was Carr. I'm thinking
about the one right after Carr. He was an Carter, I
guess his name was Carter. He was an idealistic
politician who
took a really a dim view of dealing with the Bureau
of Reclamation. Political plums and political
punishment that they dealt out to congressmen,
depending on what they supported them about. And
they severely criticized Dominie one time.
Dominie said, if you don't like what I'm doing, why
don't you fire me? Well, the outshot was that a week
later, Carter was out of a job as undersecretary.
He was just, I mean, Dominie was just too powerful.
So there was really very little to do for a science
advisor to do in the Office of the Secretary of the
Interior. I did some things. I
had a very good assistant named Howard Echols.
One of the things we did was to get a National
Academy study of the National Park Service, which
resulted in the firing of the director,
which was a major coup in Stuart's cap, or
Petterson's cap, major coup, just for this reason
I've been outlining, that these guys all had their
contention, including Conrad Worth, the
director of the National Park Service. But it was
clear from the National Academy study that the
Park Service really was not doing a very good job.
We had another study of of solar energy. Again, I
got a National Academy committee to look into the
possibilities for solar energy. Hubert Humphrey
was pushing very hard for us to establish an office
for solar energy. The trouble was he backed away
from getting any congressional authorization or
appropriation for it. He wanted us to do it on our
own. And we had a study being put together
spelled out, more or less, the possibilities for
research and development of solar energy. At that
time, they were rather dim. The reason was the
price of oil and coal was so much lower than it is
now. Now the prospects for solar energy are very
much better. But
they weren't very good when it was $3 a barrel, or $1
a gallon.
They don't look very good now, but they look an
awful lot better.
The other option was nuclear energy. It worries a
lot of people.
The other thing I did was to make a study of the
charge of the study
of a combination possibilities of combining
nuclear electric power generation with salt
water conversion.
In other words, using the low temperature steam
for evaporating seawater and high temperature
steam for making electric power.
I was chairman of the Federal Council of Science
and Technology Committee on I was a member of the
Federal Council for Science and Technology and
chairman of their committee on water resources
research. And we actually managed to get an office
of water resources research established in the
Department of Interior, which in turn supports
institutions for water resources research in
every state in the country. partly on a formula
basis and partly on a research grant basis. We have
one in Texas. Every state has one. This was a very
difficult thing to do because every other
department, half a dozen departments, are
interested in water. And every department fights
like a food tiger for its cognizance and its
prerogatives. And the Agriculture Department
and the Commerce Department
and the Department of Defense.
I
guess that was all. None of them thought it was a
good idea to give this job to Interior. They'd
rather not have it done at all than have Interior do
it, because it looked like it might interfere with
their prerogative. But fortunately, Orville
Freeman and Stuart Udall were good friends. And so
the Agriculture Department finally agreed to it.
And this was, the law was passed, and it was done.
That was perhaps the most important long-range
thing I did for the Department of the Interior. I
tried to do something about the geological survey
in particular.
getting them to support more research in colleges
and universities, following along the lines of
ONR and NSF, never had any success. And they in
general took a very dim view of the Secretary's
office, let alone the science advisors. There was
a guy named Tom Nolan who ran the survey Geological
Survey people always appear at a meeting, a
government meeting, and find themselves not
Department of the Interior, but U.S. Geological
Survey. They regard themselves as kind of a
separate branch of the government. And that's
true in general of these
old-line agencies. My job was to work for Jerry
Wiesman.
And this really changed my career. It changed my
whole life. I think, wait a second now, you better
repeat that now for a second, because I think our
tape had a 15-second delay.
In the meantime, why don't we go to the bathroom?
Okay.